Higher-Order Functions (#2044)
ocaml/ocaml.org: data/tutorials/language/0it_06_hof.md

# Higher-Order Functions

**Prerequisites:**
* Functions
* Recursion

**What you'll learn**:
* What is a higher-order function
* What are some common higher-order functions
* What is function composition
* How to compose functions
* How to make reusable functions
* How to make functions fit anywhere

**(INTERNAL): journey:**
* introduction – motivate the existence of higher-order functions with an example
* how do i make new functions from existing functions?
* composing pipelines and `|>`
    * t-first vs t-last
* point-free composition
    * how we can do it
    * why we don't do it
* usual gotchas / patterns
    * i need a function that does nothing: Fun.id
    * my function is backwards: flip
    * my function takes too many params:
        * if you can, name it
        * partial application in pipelines
        * they're in the wrong order

>             * lambda wrappers (fun x -> f 123 x true)

Author: These are internal notes to illustrate a little bit of the learning journey I had in mind (as we discussed back in December). Feel free to remove this.

Reviewer: Hi! Internal notes meaning they won't be visible on the page?

Author: Yup! Just here for the review process.

## 1. Introduction

In OCaml, working with functions quickly becomes second nature. We like to think that _functions describe the world_, and like that, we usually write functions that describe how something behaves.

Take for example a function that says hello to a person by name:

```ocaml 

> let say_hi name = print_string ("Hello, " ^ name ^ "!\n") ;;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# let say_hi name = print_string ("Hello, " ^ name ^ "!\n") ;;
val say_hi : string -> unit = <fun>
```
We've been formatting toplevel code examples like this.

```

We can call this function several times, to say hello to several people:

```ocaml 
say_hi "Xavier";;
say_hi "Sabine";;
say_hi "Joe";;
```

If we wanted to say hello to the same person multiple times, we'd just _repeat_ the same line of code.

```ocaml 
say_hi "Camel";;
say_hi "Camel";;
say_hi "Camel";;
```

> How would we avoid having to repeat this lines every time? One way of doing this would be to write a function to say hi 3 times:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One way we can avoid having to repeat this lines every time by writing a function to say "hi" 3 times:
```
It's best to stay away from questions like this when possible. I've rephrased it into a statement, if that works for you.

Author: Thank you! ✨

#### Let-ops

Unfortunately, calling `Result.bind` can be a bit awkward. We can't pipe our value through a series of binds like we can do with calls to `map`. For example, this isn't valid:

```ocaml=
let email = get_user ()
           |> Result.bind get_email
           |> Result.bind extract_domain
           |> Result.bind validate_domain
           ;;
```

Thankfully, OCaml lets us redefine a subset of operators called _let-operators_ that can be used to streamline the use of `bind` calls by making them look very close to normal let-bindings:

```ocaml=
(* first we will declare out let* operator to be equal to Result.bind *)
let (let*) = Result.bind

let* user = get_user () in
let* email = get_email user in
let* domain = extract_domain email in
validate_domain domain
```

This has the advantage of making code a lot more readable, without changing the behavior we've come to expect from bind calls.

#### Async code

Async libraries for OCaml that implement Promises/Futures usually also have a `bind` function that allows you to chain computations.

> <!-- ## 3. Recipes

Author: At @sabine's request, I've removed this section since most of the things we could think of were already dealt with above. Still I left the content in case you folks think its best to also have it summarized here below.

            * lambda wrappers (fun x -> f 123 x true)

## 1. Introduction

In OCaml, working with functions quickly becomes second nature. We like to think that _functions describe the world_, and like that, we usually write functions that describe how something behaves.

Take for example a function that says hello to a person by name:

```ocaml 
let say_hi name = print_string ("Hello, " ^ name ^ "!\n") ;;
```

We can call this function several times, to say "hello" to several people:

```ocaml 
#say_hi "Xavier";;
Hello, Xavier!
- : unit = ()

# say_hi "Sabine";;
Hello, Sabine!
- : unit = ()

# say_hi "Joe";;
Hello, Joe!
- : unit = ()
```

If we wanted to say "hello" to the same person multiple times, we'd just _repeat_ the same line of code.

```ocaml 
# say_hi "Camel";;
Hello, Camel!
- : unit = ()

# say_hi "Camel";;
Hello, Camel!
- : unit = ()

# say_hi "Camel";;
Hello, Camel!
- : unit = ()
```

How would we avoid having to repeat this lines every time? One way of doing this would be to write a function to say hi 3 times:

```ocaml 
# let say_hi_3_times name =
  say_hi name;
  say_hi name;
  say_hi name
;;
val say_hi_3_times : string -> unit = <fun>

> ```

Reviewer: This is what I get when I run this code. Do we need to call the function somehow to get it to say "hi" three times?

So instead, we will create a function that **let's the caller decide** how many times to say "hi." We do this by requiring a new argument, in this case, `times`:

```ocaml 
# let rec say_many_hi times name =
  if times < 1 then ()
  else begin
    say_hi name;
    say_many_hi (times - 1) name
  end
;;
val say_many_hi : int -> string -> unit = <fun>
```

Much better. Now we can call:

```ocaml
# say_many_hi 3 "Xavier";;
Hello, Xavier!
Hello, Xavier!
Hello, Xavier!
- : unit = ()

# say_many_hi 12 "Camel";;
Hello, Camel!
Hello, Camel!
Hello, Camel!
Hello, Camel!
Hello, Camel!
Hello, Camel!
Hello, Camel!
Hello, Camel!
Hello, Camel!
Hello, Camel!
Hello, Camel!
Hello, Camel!
- : unit = ()
```

Unfortunately, reusing this _repetition_ behaviour isn't so easy because we have hard-coded our call to `say_hi`. 

To make this reusable, we can **let the caller decide** what our function should do:

```ocaml 
# let rec repeat times thing_to_do =
  if times < 1 then ()
  else begin
    thing_to_do;
    repeat (times - 1) thing_to_do
  end
;;
val repeat : int -> 'a -> unit = <fun>
```

> But what should `thing_to_do` be? Our intuition may be that we can call:

Reviewer: I don't understand these two sentences. Do you mean: 

`thing_to_do` should call:   ???

```ocaml 
# repeat 3 (say_hi "Camel");;
Hello, Camel!
- : unit = ()
```

But our program only outputs one salutation:

```
Hello, Camel!
```

That is not what we want! We want it to say "hello" to Camel 3 times.

In OCaml, the arguments are evaluated before the function itself, so in this case, we ended up saying "hi" before we even got to the repeat function.

We can let `repeat` call `say_hi` many times by _delaying_ the function's execution by wrapping it with another function, like this:

```diff
# repeat 3 (
+ fun () ->
    say_hi "Camel");;

> ```

Reviewer: I get an error in the toplevel with this code. Have I done something wrong?

`Error: This expression should not be a function, the expected type is int`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```ocaml
# repeat 3 (
fun () ->
    say_hi "Camel");;
```
```

This means we must refactor our `repeat` function a little to _call_ our new function:

```diff
let rec repeat times thing_to_do =
  if times < 1 then ()
  else (
-   thing_to_do;
+   thing_to_do ();
    repeat (times - 1) thing_to_do)

> ;;

Reviewer: Same with this one:

`Error: This expression has type int
       This is not a function; it cannot be applied.`

Our uncurry helper is a function that takes one function as input and returns another function. It is essentially a wrapper.

The input function must have type `'a -> 'b -> 'c`. This is the type of any function that takes 2 parameters.

The output function will have type `('a * 'b) -> 'c`. Notice how the arguments `'a` and `'b` are now bundled together in a tuple!

Here's our helper:

```ocaml 
(* [uncurry] takes a function that is normally curried,
   and returns a function that takes all arguments at once. *)
# let uncurry f (x, y) = f x y;;
val uncurry : ('a -> 'b -> 'c) -> 'a * 'b -> 'c = <fun>
```

If we wanted to write `uncurry` for more arguments, we'd just make a new `uncurry3` or `uncurry4` or even `uncurry5` function that would work exactly the same:

```ocaml!
# let uncurry4 f (w, x, y, z) = f w x y z;;
val uncurry4 : ('a -> 'b -> 'c -> 'd -> 'e) -> 'a * 'b * 'c * 'd -> 'e = <fun>
```

Uncurrying can be very useful when you're dealing with lists (which we do a lot in OCaml) and when the list happens to have tuples.

Take for example this list of tuples of names and favorite emojis:

```ocaml!
# let people = [
  "🐫", "Sabine";
  "🚀", "Xavier";
  "✨", "Louis";
]
;;

> ```

Reviewer: I get a Syntax Error when running this in the toplevel.
